---
title: "Life Imitates Art" 
date: 2025-05-19
---
I no longer think Art imitates Life. In fact, how could any of us have ever thought Art imitates Life? When I read Jane Austen's novels, I had believed it was simply an imitation of the actual going-ons of domestic life in England during that period. When Austen was not popular, were there match-makers akin to Emma? Before Gothic horror became a popular genre, were there Catherine Morlands imagining themselves to be the protagonist of a Ligeia-esque epic, with undead wives lurking in ancient abbeys? There were not. 

I am not immune from the power of Art. In fact no one is, but I have felt this keenly throughout my life. As an elementary-school student I distinctly remembered narrating the "story" of my own life as I walked out the school gates, or got in the car to go home. When I read Andrew Clement's story "Frindle" I myself made up words and convinced my friends to adopt them. I knew I was imitating a story, not the other way around. Perhaps "Frindle" isn't quite art but it seems to me that any form of media can exist in such an influential manner. Essentially this is the point of Wilde's essay _On the Decay of Lying_. Wilde, as is clear to anyone that has read _The Picture of Dorian Grey_, sees life as divided into charming and tedious rather than good and evil. To moralize is to prattle on about matters of no concern to anyone whereas to lie is to charm and entertain. 

We are sadly subordinate to facts where facts should be held in the lowest esteem by fiction, says Wilde. Facts are what arise when Life fails to do its duty and attempts to subordinate Art. When Art is made to imitate Life, which is in of itself a mirror of Art, what results is a pale imitation that grasps the imagination of no one. This is what Wilde believes in the key to any form of Art, literature included—it must be absolutely independent of other things and be created for its own sake only. Thus the novelists and sculptors that captivate us and strike our fancy are not those that are cribbed from life, rather it is we that crib their abstract ideal in an attempt to bring it down to Earth. Wilde seems to decry most novelists as failing in their task of creating independent Art. I'm not sure I agree with him, for the simple reason that Art that imitates Life is not popular.

Let's take a modern example—YA romantasy. Silly? Absolutely. Real? Not in the slightest. But that is exactly the point—there are no mildly-abusive, hopelessly romantic werewolf kings looking to seduce common girls, certainly not in the "real" world. The original work of this kind that spawned all the rest came from a simple desire within the author's heart, something created for the sake of itself. Now it is a genuine crisis when people read romantasy and then find themselves eternally alone, unable to find the person of their heart's dreams that imitates Art so perfectly. So here I argue that the reason it captures the imagination is because these books are not cribbed from real life; the mundanity and stresses of real life simply cannot evoke the same emotion (or so I assume—I haven't actually talked to any romantasy readers).

I'll use myself as another example. Reading a book like Kerouac's _The Dharma Bums_ made me want to pursue mountain-climb. My very desire to  climb mountains, think about the Dharma, and realize truisms from that came directly from Kerouac. I know in the back of my mind that I am directly influenced by him and his writing to do so, even if I cannot remember the vast majority of his quotes or descriptions. I simply relish the concept, and thus forget the mundane realities of the matter—the weight of my pack as I struggle through elevation, the biting wind, so on. An ideal is created in my heart, and it must be realized. Wilde's own example comes from stories of charming thieves, Robin Hoods and Jack Sheppards, those who all young boys wish to imitate. Who hasn't read the tale of Robin Hood and wanted to steal from the rich with a smile? No one, though it is mostly safe to say that any real-life Robin Hood must have been similarly influenced by heroes of the past.

Often I catch myself thinking about events in my own life or the lives of others through narrative arcs. It's an easy thing to do. My friend breaks up with his girlfriend and sets off to see the world (or at least California). How many times have we seen this in literature, in film, in drama? I in fact think about his own life journey as nothing but a tale, with this being a crossroads leading to some rising or falling action soon. This makes perfect sense! Expression is foremost, with everything striving to recreate that sensation. Feelings of love or tragedy or humor are all strongest in Art and our own lives simply try to form some pale imitation of them. Sad? Perhaps, but if anything I feel it gives me even greater respect for those artists who manage to achieve perfect originality. How hard is that? Any tale I could think of would first be an imitation of my own life (idealized) or then a poor attempt at cribbing from a novelist I enjoy. I have been doing just that as long as I can think, from when I attempted to re-write Harry Potter as a third-grader in India. 

There is nothing to life but the aesthetics we draw together from various sources. We live, in essence, to embody some sort of aesthetic. I have believed and now continue to believe that those who truly prattle on about moral outcomes in this matter or that draw their own beliefs and protests from aesthetics, as well. Influence is Art.



