---
title: "What to Make of Aestheticism?" 
date: 2025-05-21
---
Well, I'm done with my Oscar Wilde marathon. To be fair, it wasn't particularly long—I started _The Decay of Lying_ on Monday, finished it that very same day, and moved on to _The Critic as an Artist_. This I started on Tuesday and finished this morning after breakfast. I will say, however, it was one of the first times aside from my experiences in a class where I sat down and read (mostly) each line intentionally, with the aim of understanding a strand of philosophy thoroughly. Wilde's excellent writing style and Socratic Dialogue format was a great boon, of course—it was easy to get sucked into his characters' lofty descriptions of Aesthetics. I suspect Descartes and Kierkegaard may not be so entertaining (though I am sure they will be just as valuable to my growth). 

Wilde's philosophy—Aestheticism—is an extremist line of philosophy. In a series of sweeping statements, Wilde claims that morality is utterly pointless, Life and Nature are tedious and uninspiring, that Criticism is the greatest Art, and that it is best to Lie fearlessly rather than tell the truth like a simpleton. He decries such heroes as George Washington for ruining the spirit of America, being a man so obsessed with telling the truth. What to make of this? He certainly backs up his points—largely anecdotally, but in a persuasive manner—I suspect that is Wilde's greatest skill, that deadly combination of persuasion and charm though of course one could say persuasion starts with charm. Can any of it be relied on? Must it even be relied on? Or shall we approach Wilde with the skepticism and "temperament" he demands of critics at large?

For context, throughout _The Critic as an Artist__, Wilde argues that the Critic produces a greater form of Art than Creation. His defense for this is that Art can be dull and uninspiring, but that a critic can turn a dull and uninspiring work into something else altogether. His standards as such for criticism seem to be lower than that of Art—Art must be independent and for its own sake, but Criticism can approach even a factual, dull Art and imbibe it with profound beauty. Not Meaning, however—Meaning in Art is in fact the meanest thing possible, for Meaning immediately suggests of some moralistic prattle. 

Ok. This sort of makes sense. If we go back to Kant and his transcendental idealism, he argues that our knowledge of things is limited to the appearances that we can sense. We give to objects some characteristics based on our limited senses—we call them "red" or "blue" or say that they are soft to the touch. However we should know quite clearly that our senses are limited and lie to us frequently (three cheers, says Wilde), so the mystery of things is never quite known. This is the same for Art, as it seems. When a critic looks at the Mona Lisa, he does not see what it is (as the artist imagined) necessarily but projects some of himself onto the Mona Lisa. The individualism of the critic is then reflected in the Art and he sees in it "a placid smile of utter indifference, like a lake is indifferent to the movement of a small fish". Utter projection! Who knows, and better yet _who cares_ what da Vinci thought? Art is in the eye of the beholder and now that the beholder and critic has judged it to be so you will now imagine it in the same light (or similar) as the Critic, and the work of Art has now taken a new form altogether!

Now we have got the measure of Aestheticism. There is only one thing ever worth shunning, according to Wilde, and it is that which is tedious or stupid. The only thing worth pursuing is Beauty. Art is beautiful (sometimes). Creation is action, which is worrying close to delusion. Criticism is the highest form of Art and just about any great Artist can be thought of as a Critic. Plato was a critic, Dante was a critic, Wilde himself was surely a critic. His art itself is a criticism of domesticity, social philanthropy, morality, and the dull. The man himself was anything but dull, with a propensity to lie freely (the greatest of "virtues"!) and seek out beauty at the expense of his own life. Can his own philosophy be criticized?

I wonder. The problem with arguing against a philosophy like Aestheticism is that it is incredibly subjective and extremist. Wilde would surely argue that a nation ought to be sacrificed in its entirety for the sake of one beautiful epic. This is not a defensible premise for the vast, vast majority of society and probably not even for those who call themselves Aestheticists. What is the point of arguing against this, then? Wilde's philosophy comes from a dread of mundane society, and perhaps out to be psycho-analyzed to come to a better root. I am not proficient in such matters and honestly I see no point in it. Instead I would say that Wilde's school of philosophy is extreme as satire is extreme. It should be treated more as a desire for society (particularly England) to consider beauty over practicality more. Wilde's characters themselves admit they are full of contradictions; it would not do to attempt to build a society on the back of such arguments. But a shift towards beauty, a shift towards making it acceptable to daydream and contemplate? That would make perfect sense. Wilde as they all do make it clear that to do absolutely nothing is the greatest thing in the world. Simply to contemplate and dream rather than think of practical matters—that is the Chief Good, or the end that we all wish to achieve. So let us do just that.
