---
title: "Why does Stoner resonate with us?"
date: 06/07
---

When I finished John Williams' _Stoner_, I first went to search for literary criticism of the book online, as I typically do. The majority of the results were titled some variation of "The Greatest American Novel You've Never Heard of". This seems accurate - I don't recall where, exactly, I first came across Stoner, but it was likely in a list of great American novels. Having not heard of it (while I had heard of most of the others), I looked it up and quickly read a synopsis on Wikipedia.

Stoner is, putting it lightly, a grim novel. There is little hope in a book like this, and what little hope exists is fleeting at best. The beginning of the book describes how little Stoner is remembered by his colleagues at the English department; it is every promising young person's greatest fear—not living a life of any renown. Stoner, a farmer's son who falls in love with literature while at Mizzou, faces gloom at every turn. His marriage is a failure from the beginning, as he falls in love with an idea more so than an actual woman. His once-promising academic career crumbles in the face of department politics. His daughter, the light of his life, is poisoned against him by his wife. When he finds love in an affair—true love, with a similarly passioned scholar—it is taken away from him on threat of scandal. All he can cling to is his teaching, his goal of conveying his love for the written word to students of literature. Even this falls away as he is diagnosed with cancer, eventually tiring of all else before death.

Incalculably grim. Why would anyone read a book about such a pitiful man? He lacks the courage to stand up for himself and make decisive choices when he ought to, instead letting life take him as it may. What is there to learn from Stoner, except that one ought to be more judicious in his choice of marriage? Why is Stoner, irrelevant to many, so loved by those who chance upon Williams' work?

Frankly put, it is because Stoner is real. His life is absolutely real, and his characters are real without a fault. Who hasn't experienced "falling in love" with an idealized person? When the inexperienced Stoner decides that he is in love with Edith, his future wife, what is he basing his decision on? They do not get on well together—they hardly get on at all! He sees a character that strikes him as the picture of his own love, and commits himself to a lifetime of misery, wavering throughout. Perhaps we have not all done the same, but this experience of the idealized love is surely common to mankind. "If only she were like *this* or *that*", we say, knowing full well that will never be the case!

Further, who has not experienced Stoner's absolute difficulty, putting into words a feeling that simply cannot be placed? When Stoner falls in love with literature, with a particular sonnet from Shakespeare, it is a feeling that enraptures him. It fills him with confusion and gives him a feeling that he simply can't place in words. This carries on for him in his first year as an instructor, when he struggles to give voice to everything he loves about his subject. There is something about love, real love, that makes it nigh-impossible to speak properly. I have failed over and over to convey my own passion, for books, mountains, even just the simplicity of the sun streaming in through a cracked window. Hell, I struggle even to explain my love for *Stoner*, a book I have only just finished. 

When Stoner eventually falls in love with another person, it is with another graduate student at the University. He loves her, and his feelings are not borne of an ideal but the truth of two people finding kinship. There was no kinship to be found between Stoner and Edith, nor would there ever be. It was not love that guided their marriage, but the steadfast, midwestern ideal of toughing something out as long as one possibly could. This is yet another—difficult to read—theme of the novel. 

Reviews of *Stoner* nearly always point out that the values laid out in the novel are of a different era. They are—there is the Protestant work ethic of the Northeast brought to the midwest, a work ethic that values hard work and sheer suffering over all else. Stoner, though seemingly above the pointlessness of working a farm with ever-degrading soil, does not seem to above this ideal of suffering. He suffers simply to suffer, for the sake of martyrdom. Yet rather than being infuriating, this quality of his endears him to me. When Stoner chooses to stay with Edith, he is choosing a life of suffering for himself. He endures it all, not patiently—for patience implies hope for something better—but with grim fortitude. We are to understand that there are choices that, when made, lead to such suffering, and it is not so easy to escape as it may seem. Hard to read? Yes. But we, a generation accustomed to self-sabotage and grim notions of the future, understand perfectly.

Finally, what of his affair with Katherine? What are we to make of the plight of Stoner—ought we pity him when he cheats on his wife so blatantly, with her own knowledge? Is he the martyr he is portrayed to be? Or is he, as he recognizes from the average person's point of view, a sly forty-something assistant professor shacking up with an instructor half his age? I believe both points can be considered. On the one hand, Stoner's actions are objectively harmful. Even considering the awful actions of Edith, the correct thing to do is surely to divorce her before starting an affair. It is debatable whether this would have harmed Grace (his daughter) or not, but considering the way she turned out, it is hard to imagine a divorce would have made her worse off. 

On the other hand, he found genuine love—one of the only things he truly had—with Katherine. Everything about their relationship felt real. Their awkward courtship, the way they learned to live in each other's presence, and eventually, their mutual decision to cut things off for the sake of convenience felt perfectly attuned to this world. This was not an implacable affair—one of those many cases of a man simply cheating out of boredom—but a drawn out, well-built relationship. If he were not married, it is likely Stoner's story would have ended far differently—perhaps even with a sliver of joy. However, it is not Williams' aim to give his characters joy or respite. Everyone has their problems and their flaws, and they are all placed within a transient backdrop of war and eventual prosperity. Times are always changing, and Stoner along with his wife seem out of place in every era.

In the end, is this what we love about Stoner? Anyone that has read Stoner has probably come across Williams by virtue of loving literature, and feeling out of place within modern works. There are few who have so keenly captured the feeling of love like Stoner—love for concepts, people, and one's work. Though it hides behind a grim vision of World War era Missouri, there is love to be found all throughout the pages of John Williams' standout text. Choose it.



