---
title: "Not Getting It" 
date: 2025-05-11
---
I've been listening to the song RHCP's "If You Have to Ask" lately. If you have to ask, you'll never know. Is that true? I understand the sentiment of the song—if you have to ask, if you can't just figure it out on your own, you'll never be "in". If you have to ask Anthony Kiedis who "Mr. Bubble" is and what he has to do with "superfly", you're already hopeless. Never gonna make it. With that being said, how do we learn but by asking? For example, I'm still relatively new to the outdoors. If I hear the phrase "boondocking" thrown around and I have no idea what that means, what's the harm in asking? If I don't know why it's custom to say "LNT!" as you pack in used candy bar wrappers, why not just ask?

What I hear all the time from people in the know, or at least people that claim to understand the sentiments of those in the know (not the same at all), is that people in the know do not hesitate to share their knowledge. No one looks down on the beginner, everyone is happy to help no matter how stupid the question is. From my own experience this just isn't true. You ask the bodybuilder next to you how to use the lat pulldown and he'll probably show you. Ask him to describe in detail his meal plan and he'll tell you to figure that shit out yourself. But how do you? Assuming you're a beginner, you don't even know what you need to know. There's a million different schools of thought involved in every endeavor, and beginners are incredibly susceptible to picking the easiest paths and looking for confirmation bias. If you have to ask, you'll never know. Or maybe you will know eventually, but it will take you a long journey of self-guided learning to get there.

Do I sound like I'm complaining about this? Maybe, but I've never been more proud of myself or a friend than when they have pushed through the inherent discomfort of finding something out for themselves. I don't think you get the same thing out of Conrad's <i>Heart of Darkness</i> or Kerouac's <i>Big Sur</i> if you don't come across and the read the books by yourself. I was <i>taught</i> the former, I discovered the latter. And while I was enchanted by Conrad's imagery and the madness of colonialism, it did not seep into my bones as Kerouac's insanity did. A friend of mine—a professor of Physics at the College—told me the other day that most things in life can be absorbed individually, literature and philosophy amongst them. I agree—there is simply no need to ask when you can probe the self further by finding out on your own.

There's nothing wrong with asking. If you have a brilliant teacher and a keen mind, asking will always get you somewhere. I'm not a brilliant teacher, however, and my mind is prone to wandering after I hear the opening of an answer. When a friend asked me recently to explain Abbey's <i>Desert Solitaire</i>, my first reaction was to think: "How on earth can you summarize someone like Abbey?" Any description I gave would be less than adequate and completely miss the point. When I explained that the book was about a man becoming "one with the desert", I immediately felt it to be a lame explanation. Abbey's own argument that something is lost when a concept is expressed in words made perfect sense; I had the measure of the man, but it was trapped somewhere within me. My friend was not satisfied with the answer (though she said it sounded cool—we all know what that means), so aside from politeness why even ask? I myself have asked about Dostoevsky's <i>White Nights</i> over and over and remember absolute nothing about the book save for that I should read it. Do you have to ask?

I have more to say on Abbey, only tangentially related the original point. Firstly, that I have recently caught myself thinking "Wow, they just don't get it" after having a conversation with someone. What is it? Some vague principle of Abbey's, some idea of industrial tourism or the like. I immediately thought better of that, feeling needlessly harsh and pretentious. Does reading a book make me a better person? Maybe it gives me some ideas I would not have had otherwise, but it makes me no better or worse than someone else, except for someone that does not read at all (I will die on that hill). But does my point stand? The fact of the matter is that they probably don't get it, it being the viewpoints I have developed through a meandering strand of literature, from friends and family and classes I have taken... etc. It's a pervasive feeling, no matter how much I try to shake that. I don't think I will ever be able to change that—it isn't so much a knowledge gap as it is a mindset to be open to eccentric ideas (many of which I am not open to myself). But to their credit, are they even asking? And if they aren't, I find myself having an argument with myself. What is a blog post anyway if not an argument with yourself?

Here's to hoping I write more here, if only to flesh out my thought chains like this one.
