---
title: "Jazz Age: Romantic or Realistic?" 
date: 2025-05-11
---
Only today, I at last finished the slog of a book that was Fitzgerald's _The Beautiful and the Damned_. Published in 1922, it was described by Fitzgerald himself as loosely based on the early years of his marriage to the flapper Zelda Fitzgerald (née Sayre). The book catalogued the slow descent of Anthony Patch and Gloria Gilbert into their thirties. They begin married life happy, passionately dreaming of travel and intellectual vitality as some of the last members of the great American Leisure CLass—we now know them, of course, as the Hedonistic Unemployed. Sadly, they take their lifestyle of drink and frivolous merriment too far, and find themselves disowned by the titan of industry and Prohibition Era moral reformer that is Anthony's grandfather. Losing out on their promised inheritance, they slowly slip into disarray and alcoholism until they win an appeal on the inheritance (years later), though of course the couple has absolutely lost it by this point. End of story.

To begin with, _The Beautiful and the Damned_ excels in characterization. Anthony is excellently portrayed as a man of leisure, with his actions and ideals changing and evolving just as you might expect of a once-golden boy "intellectual type" in the late '10s. Gloria is depicted as outrageously provocative and oh-so-enticing with her eccentric ways and bouts of passion, and her fear of losing her youth and vitality manifests in the dated, shabby finery she dons upon falling from grace. Their closest friends, Maury Noble and Dick Caramel, are stellar examples of idealists fallen short. The former, an intellectual forever striving to refine his own philosophies eventually goes into business, striking it rich doing work he once thought meaningless. The latter continues writing after his literary success "The Demon Lover" yet proceeds to write drivel for the sake of money. Anthony in his inability to commit himself to either profiteering or writing struggles, the perfect example of an idealist who fails even at selling out.

Anthony and Gloria amplify the worst in each other, though it would be a mistake to say that their marriage was a mistake from the get-go. Rather, their marriage starts strong, with the carefree nature of youth and "ends" in disarray, as neither of the pair ever truly grew up. Heavily capital-R "Romantic" until it met capital-R "Realism" with financial difficulties and a transition from pre-war nobility to post-war strivers. This is what I would like to discuss as the main point of this essay—the contrast of romanticism and realism within the Jazz Age, that golden age of Fitzgerald, the flappers, and an eventual throughline to American Meritocracy.

The first half of _The Beautiful and the Damned_ is Romantic in nature. Anthony spends his days debating matters of literature with Maury and Dick and his nights engaging in genteel social calls upon women of his class. Fitzgerald's depictions of the New York elite, those who dine at the Ritz and stay at the Biltmore, bring to mind depictions of the temperamental nobles of Austen's novels. Characters take on but one distinguishing point—like caricatures—whether that be a tendency to stammer through "yeses" or catchphrases like "you cra-a-azy". The tone of the whole affair is comic, with the majority of characters serving to relieve Anthony and Maury from boredom. The aristocracy—"old boys" from Harvard and Yale with fortunes awaiting them are king, and the rest (women) are chiefly opportunists. It is clear to all that Anthony is no opportunist, but rather a catch, with his handsome visage and excellent prospects—humorous considering Anthony is meant to be Fitzgerald himself^.

Anthony meets Gloria, and for a time the book continues with its capital-R Romance. Their romance is one of pursuit (on Anthony's side) and once in love they are swiftly entangled, with sweeping declarations of their passion for each other. However, you can almost tell from the get-go that it will not last. As soon as both of them begin thinking to themselves that they no longer find other men/women boring, it is a quick sign that the two - flighty as they are - are ill-fitted for long-lasting, stable romance. Here Fitzgerald tends to make a number of sweeping clames - namely that _no one_ is suited really for long-lasting romance, because the spark will necessarily fade. I am not sure I agree with Fitzgerald (I mean, just look at his own life story) but nonetheless it got me thinking about the nature of romantic love.

To me, this is the where the Realism sets in. The romantic days are gone. The spark fades, replaced with poorly-hidden resentment from both Anthony and Gloria. Anthony thinks Gloria is flighty (she is). Gloria thinks Anthony is a coward (he is). The bad that is cleverly hidden from sight in the courtship process is there for all to see.
 
^Of course the character is made more tragic for his initial comeliness. So perhaps Fitzgerald draws himself up to demonstrate his eventual fall—amazing clarity from a man known for his insecurities.


